This is the original text this project evolved from.

Date: August 24, 2018

---

Abstract: the theory of compression solves solipsism, problem of induction, problem of other minds, defines reality and laws of nature, defines what explanatory power is, and shows why supernatural theories and irrefutable theories are bad explanations. Knowledge and science are both a form of compression.

You know that you are thinking, but the images and sounds which surround you could in principle be generated on some computer and fed to your sensory input nerves electrically, or it could all be in your imagination.

Yet the world you encounter contains structure. The sun rises every day, and in order to explain the world you need to use some theories, or mathematical models. Once you are done with the modeling, you can add “and it is all in my head”, but this addition would be just an unnecessary complication.

The sun rises every day but this fact does not logically imply that it will rise tomorrow, after all, there are phenomena which persist until one day they stop. The reason why we predict the sun will rise tomorrow is because our best theories say so. Our theories work, but again, who is to say our theories will not tomorrow stop working? Inductive reasoning works but it would be circular to conclude from that that it will keep working. This is known as the problem of induction.

Through our life we receive a lot of data through our senses from our environment, in a similar way science receives a lot of data about our world. Let’s say we observe data “1111” and then stop observing any data. What kind of process is generating this data? It could be a process with generates 5 ones and then 5 zeroes, but it could also be a process which generates just a stream of ones without end. The latter seams a simpler explanation. Each piece of data we observe has in infinity of theories consistent with it, but some are simpler. Each theory corresponds to a computer program. Let’s say the two programs consistent with the data are, when written in binary, “1010” (call this program A) and “1010110” (program B). Obviously A is a better explanation because B is just A with some additional bits added at the end. Still, it is possible for B to be a true explanation, it’s just less likely. In the future there could arrive data which makes A inconsistent with it and B consistent. We said B is less likely, but how much less likely it is? Eight times. That is, 2^3, because bits have 2 states they can be in, and B is longer than A by 3 bits. There are 8 different ways to expand on program A, and we chose one of them. The method which defines the complexity of a string S as the length of the shortest program which outputs S it is known as Kolmogorov complexity. Assigning probabilities to programs depending on their length is known as Solomonoff induction. Each new element of a mechanism in our explanation reduces probability exponentially.

It’s not important in which programming language the program is written in. Consider a program which is very long when written in C and shorter when written in Python. We can write a compiler for Python using C and treat the Python program as a string which is fed into the compiler. Thus the length of the new C program is the length of the compiler + length of the Python program. When we are considering very long programs, the length of the compiler is just a small constant added at the beginning.

Since there are infinitely many programs consistent with the data we observe, in practice we can’t compute the probability for each one. Also, some programs may be stuck in infinite loops and we can’t know which ones. That is, Kolmogorov complexity and Solomonoff induction are uncomputable. Nevertheless, this process can be approximated and it can give important conceptual insights.

Each program defines the state of the world and a way to compute future states. The ways to compute the future states from current ones are also known as laws of nature. The state of the world is also known as reality. The program gives us predictions about what will happen next, but we arrive at that prediction by trying to compress (or in other words, explain) the existing data. The programs which behave according to the same principles all the time are shorter (simpler) than programs which produce one kind of data for some time and then suddenly change and start producing data according to some other rules. This is why the sun will very probably rise tomorrow. The problem of induction dissolves. Our knowledge enables us, to a limited degree, to see into the future. The goal of science is not only prediction, nor is it only explaining the world, it is both.

The state of the world as the solipsist sees it is that not only is there a program which describes what is happening but also that this program is running inside his head. This explanation is longer (more complex) than just specifying the program. The same obviously applies to God.

You are aware of your own thoughts and experiences but not aware of other people’s experiences. It is entirely consistent to suppose other people don’t have them. Whatever consciousness is, the program which generates the data we see and gives rise to consciousness in all humans is simpler than the one in which you need to additionally specify which specific human is conscious.

Why did it rain? It could be some witch caused it by casting a spell. Supernatural entities such as witches, demons and so on are all complex objects consisting of a large number of parts while the mechanisms which actually cause rain can be defined with a few equations.

This does not mean the universe actually is a program being run somewhere. We are using program length as a measure of complexity of the mathematical structure which is compressing the data we see. For the idea that our universe is being run on a cosmic computer to be true, that requires not just to specify the program being run, but also to add the unnecessary complication “and it is being run on a computer”. That computer could be instantiated in a whole other universe with a separate laws of nature, which complicates the explanation further. Alternatively, the computer could be some kind of abstraction, like a Turing machine, but the program is already an abstraction so it is simpler to assume that our universe is a mathematical structure.

Theories which explain a lot of different phenomena at the same time while being simple are said to have greater explanatory power. That is because they have greater rate of compression, which would be the length of data divided by the length of the program. Over time the rate of compression also increases as we unify models such as when light, electricity and magnetism were merged into electromagnetism, or when heat was understood to be the motion of atoms.

The stars are actually other suns, operating according to the same laws as our sun does. There are billions and billions of them. Wouldn’t the world be simpler if instead of all those suns we had just a glass sphere surrounding the Earth, with holes through which the light from outside would enter? This is exactly what William of Ockham meant when he said that entities are not to be multiplied without necessity. In saying that he got it exactly wrong. It is not entities which should not be multiplied, it’s the laws. The universe seems like it has limitless memory capacity, the memory is cheap while the descriptions are expensive.

The best model in cosmology today is a model in which the universe is infinite. If it was finite then the cosmic microwave background radiation would look differently than it does. The data we see reveals us something about the data we do not see because that unseen data is too far in space. This is not surprising because we already know the data we see reveals us the data we do not see because the unseen data is too far in time, namely, in the future.

On the basis of an extinct animal’s fossil, by the shape of its teeth, we can conclude if the animal was a herbivore or a carnivore. The evidence is indirect, as all evidence is, the evidence for the theory being true is always gathered from the effects of that theory being true. In the case it wasn’t true, the world would look differently than it does. Even reading a chemistry textbook, you believe the textbook without performing every experiment yourself. When viewing the world with your eyes, you are not looking at the objects directly but you are observing the effects which reflected light has on your nerves.

Any program which describes the data correctly can be changed by adding some useless parts, which make the program longer but do not alter the output. The predictions of both programs are the same, so this additional parts can’t be ruled out as false, those parts are irrefutable (or unfalsifiable). The only way to produce irrefutability is by making the explanation longer than it needs to be. It may appear that the theory which claims the universe is infinite is irrefutable, since we can’t actually visit all of the universe and thus confirm it is infinite. In fact it is refutable because it does make testable predictions about cosmic radiation. You do not need to be able to go to the end of space and personally check if it is infinite, that theory is the shortest program which compresses the data and as such of course it is refutable.

Our observations of the motion of planets are consistent with a geocentric model of the solar system. In order for geocentrism to make correct predictions it needs to model planetary motion as circles within circles, which leads to a complex and long to describe laws of nature. You could claim that the heliocentric system is just a simpler way of computing things while in reality the Earth stands still. That would certainly be more intuitive to accept, the Earth looks like it is standing still. The Earth also looks like it is flat, if it’s round, does that mean that the people on the other side stand on their heads? It turns out that concepts of up and down are not fundamental but are defined in relation to the center of the Earth as explained by the law of gravity. The Earth also looks exactly like it is round with a curvature of around 8 cm per kilometer and moving around the Sun 30 kilometers per second. The fact you don’t feel the movement is because there is no acceleration. Today we learn this facts in school as children and grow to accept them as obvious. They are not obvious at all, they are shocking, and if we didn’t learn them as children they would be much less widely accepted. It is not clear at first sight that we should accept them only because they are the simplest way to explain the data. The progress of science continually runs counter to our intuitions, which is exactly what you would expect from the fact that we are evolved creatures, our intuitions evolved to understand the world at a scale from roughly 10^(-4) to 10^7 meters. This is why when it comes to scientific questions our inborn intuitions can be ignored. This does not imply intuition can be ignored in your personal life. Also, the intuitions of a professional scientist, mathematician or an engineer are developed over time with practice and are often the reverse from the natural intuitions one is born with.

Heliocentrism could still be wrong. We used to think the Earth is flat, then to be a sphere, then to be a sphere which is slightly flattened at the poles, then we concluded it has an irregular shape called a geoid. Science seems to change its mind a lot. Yet each correction was smaller than the previous one with our models being less and less wrong. The simple version of heliocentrism in which the Earth rotates around the Sun is in fact wrong. The Earth rotates around the solar system’s center of mass, which is never perfectly in the center of the Sun, it’s tilted slightly, mostly affected by Jupiter. When we discover the theory of everything we can be sure it will be consistent with this updated version of heliocentrism.
